+++
title = "Ruminations on the end-to-end argument"
date = 2018-08-13
[taxonomies]
tags=["code", "systems"]
+++

I spend a lot of my time reading papers and over the years a couple have
always stuck out to me. For this post I
wanted to write about an oldie but goodie: Saltzer, Reed, and Clark's
"[End-To-End Arguments in System Design][e2epaper]."

<!-- more -->

The end-to-end argument posits that functions between cooperating
components can only be properly implemented by the components themselves,
as opposed to any sort of middleware between the components. The
canonical example is reliable delivery between network-separated applications:
while network protocols can ensure packets flow through the
network intact, only the application can verify complete, end-to-end correctness.
If there is an error buffering to or from the socket, if there is memory
corruption, if the application itself is buggy, the fact that the packet
made its way through the network is not useful as the data must still be
re-sent.

This is not to say that reliable delivery implemented at the network layer
is useless (see: TCP), and it doesn't mean all functions between components
must be implemented end-to-end. The crux of the end-to-end argument is that
a function can only be implemented with complete correctness end-to-end, and
any implementation by middleware is incomplete and can exist at most as a
*potential* enhancement.

As another example, in a voicemail setting receiving voice data intact is important.
Without a protocol like TCP the application would need to handle
ordered error-free delivery in addition to making sure the voice data is
OK - here TCP is a welcome enhancement.

Conversely, in a VoIP setting latency is key.
A protocol like TCP would be inappropriate as any delays caused by
retries would be unacceptable. Instead, VoIP
is often sent over an unreliable protocol like UDP with end-to-end
checking being handled by the participants themselves: "Can you say that again?"

That is the gist of the paper, but I encourage anyone who hasn't read the
paper, at all or in a while, to read it. I also recommend watching
Professor Justine Sherry's [talk on the paper][e2etalk] at PWLConf 2016.

While the paper is often cited as a systems paper, I have seen several examples
of the argument in programming languages and software engineering. The rest
of this post discusses some of these examples.

### Reifying effects

In functional programming it is common to talk about reifying effects, where
"effect" refers to a context in which a value is computed. For instance,
the evaluation of a value which may or may not exist can be considered an effect.
In languages like Java or Go such an effect is built into the language with the
special `null` value. Constrast this with languages like Haskell and OCaml where
such an effect is explicitly reified into a distinct type constructor,
`Maybe a` versus `a`.

We can view this through the lens of the end-to-end argument by looking at
the expressions producing or consuming such values as the components and the language
itself as the middleware. In the `null` case the language has
provided functionality "for free," allowing any reference value to be assigned
`null` if there is no meaningful value to assign.
However as evidenced by the now famous "[Billion Dollar Mistake][billionDollarNull]" talk,
this provided functionality does more harm than good.
Many languages have since opted for a more explicit, end-to-end method of signaling
absence of a value.

One interesting language to look at is Scala - while
the language itself does have `null`, much of the community pretends it doesn't
and instead wraps relevant values in the `Option` constructor. Unfortunately, just
like if reliable delivery was used in VoIP, the cost of the unnecessary
middleware functionality must still be paid as a value of type `Option` may
still be `null`.

The same argument can be made for other effects, including exceptions
(`Either`), dependency injection (`Reader`), and side effects (`IO`).

### Source vs. binary dependencies

Package managers have to make a choice between
source versus binary dependencies. On one hand source dependencies retain all the
structure setup by its developers and allow the user to
turn on whatever flags, features, and optimizations they want. On the other hand binary
dependencies are compiled and much easier to use and install,
at the cost of hoping the packaged configuration is configured to par.

Unfortunately binary dependencies can be inconvenient to depend on, especially in
an ecosystem like the JVM where classpaths can conflict and need to be
binary compatible. [Innocent changes to source][bincompatEx] that
would work fine in a source dependency model can cause runtime errors in
a binary dependency model.

Here we can treat packages as components and the toolchain as the middleware. If the
toolchain is centered around binary dependencies, any customizations of
a dependency a package becomes difficult and often results in
not only forking the dependency, but also re-packaging and publishing
the dependency. Contrast with a toolchain built for source dependencies, the
only steps needed would be to fork and re-point the location of the source
to depend on.

Again this is not to say the end-to-end argument
suggests source dependencies are strictly better than binary dependencies.
Rather it suggests that binary dependencies, while often times convenient,
are an incomplete mechanism for dependency management; a source dependency
model is more complete.

To this last point, while the [Nix][nix] package manager is designed around
source dependencies, it also supports binary dependencies explicitly
as an optimization - see [Dr. Eelco Dolstra's Ph.D. thesis][nixThesis],
section 7.3 for more information.

### Frameworks vs. libraries

For the past couple of years I struggled with figuring out what it was about
"libraries" that I liked and "frameworks" that I didn't, but as it turns out
the end-to-end argument is applicable here too.

With enough handwaving, we can define *frameworks* as components that want
code a certain way, and if you can mold your
problem to fit the model then you can "just plug-in" to a larger
ecosystem and get functionality "for free." The [Akka][akka] project is one example
of this.

In contrast, *libraries* are components that provide pieces of functionality
which you pull piecemeal without having to go all-in on an
ecosystem. To contrast, [FS2][fs2] is an example of this.

Still my definitions are vague, and I will likely write a
dedicated blog post about this in the future. For now I can only present
a heuristic I use to gauge if something is a framework or a library.
Given a function that has no knowledge of the components in question, how
easy is it to use that function in the context of the component?
In Akka this often involves creating an actor that
then interacts with the other actors. In FS2, the combinator-centric model
allows us to immediately use the function in a stream.

Applying the end-to-end argument, frameworks often try to encapsulate
a lot of functionality in the middleware, at the cost of requiring users to
mold their problem to the framework. In a library model functionality
is provided piecemeal and it is on the user to compose them to their
liking. The justification of frameworks then hinges on whether or not the
partial functionality provided is worth the cost of having to re-cast the
problem, and at times having to break the mold and re-implement functionality end-to-end.

For more discussion, [Tim Perrett][frameworksTim] and
[Paul Chiusano][frameworksPaul] have also written about this topic.
Section 5 of the end-to-end paper also discusses many examples which ring of
the frameworks vs. libraries debate.

### The sidecar pattern

For a systems-y example, a common pattern that has emerged in the world
of schedulers and containers is the use of sidecars. The term sidecar is
used to describe a container that run alongside the main
application container to provide additional functionality such as proxying,
logging, metrics, etc. Often times sidecars are automatically injected by
the deployment system, the idea being that service owners need only concern
themselves with their application.

However, because sidecars run outside of the application, any functionality they
provide must be done with incomplete information. For example, if the sidecar
is a reverse proxy that does retries or load balancing, it must do so with
limited information. Perhaps retries are done for any non-2xx status code,
or load balancing just round robins. However, more sophisticated policies
must be implemented at the application-level, such as a first-response-wins
scatter-gather approach, or if the application wants to exploit
knowledge of caching or data locality.

### Tip of the iceberg

The examples I've presented above are only four among many examples I've run
into the past couple of years. Some other examples include:

* Reified generics vs. type erasure in language runtimes
* Green threads vs. OS threads
* Monolithic vs. two-level vs. shared-state cluster schedulers
* Prescriptive ([Kubernetes][k8s]) vs. open systems ([Hashistack][hashi])

I encourage you as you design or evaluate systems to do so while keeping
the end-to-end argument in mind. Rest assured as I
[work on Nelson][nelsonTicket] I will too.

[akka]: https://akka.io/
[billionDollarNull]: https://www.infoq.com/presentations/Null-References-The-Billion-Dollar-Mistake-Tony-Hoare
[bincompatEx]: https://github.com/typelevel/cats/blob/6f049ad68387deefbf5a527f4fbb1d5910d8fc6e/core/src/main/scala/cats/data/Kleisli.scala#L185-L192
[e2epaper]: http://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~prabal/resources/osprelim/SRC84.pdf
[e2etalk]: https://youtu.be/aR_UOSGEizE
[frameworksPaul]: http://pchiusano.blogspot.com/2010/09/push-libraries-vs-pull-libraries.html
[frameworksTim]: http://timperrett.com/2016/11/12/frameworks-are-fundimentally-broken/
[fs2]: https://functional-streams-for-scala.github.io/fs2/
[hashi]: https://www.hashicorp.com/
[k8s]: https://kubernetes.io/
[nelsonTicket]: https://github.com/getnelson/nelson/issues/79
[nix]: https://nixos.org/nix/
[nixThesis]: https://nixos.org/~eelco/pubs/phd-thesis.pdf
